Readme.md, before:

# eggd vcf handler for uranus


## What does this app do?

This app bundles up a set of assets to enable taking the VCFs from sentieon mutect2 and:
- Annotates and filters the sentieon mutect2 VCF
- Produces a tsv variant list that provides clinical scientists with a complete list of variants with some annotation and preformatted text for Epic
- Produces a VCF that can be used as input for BSVI, which is incompatible with mutect2's (correct) representation of multiallelic variants in VCF

## What are typical use cases for this app?
This app uses the follow tools which are app assets:
* bcftools (v1.12)
* bedtools (v2.30.0)
* VEP (v103.1) (docker image)

This app has access to the Internet

## What data are required for this app to run?
- VCF outputted by sentieon mutect2 as part of Uranus workflow
- BED file that details ROIs for myeloid NGS panel
- Genome FASTA and index that was used by to generate the VCF

## What does this app output?
- TSV variant list
- BSVI-friendly VCF

## How does this app work?
- Filters VCF with bedtools:
    - retain variants within ROI
- Filters VCF with bcftools:
    - retain positions where at least one variant has AF > 0.03
    - retain positions where DP >99
    - split multiallelics using --keep-sum AD which changes the ref AD to be the sum of AD's
    - split multiallelics requires fixing AD and RPA number field in header from `.` to `R`
- Annotates VCF with VEP:
    - Annotate against specified refseq transcripts with
        - gene symbol
        - variant class
        - variant consequence
        - exon number
        - HGVS c. & p.
        - gnomAD AF
        - SIFT
        - PolyPhen
        - dbSNP
        - COSMIC
        - ClinVar
- Filters VCF with VEP:
    - Retain variants with gnomAD AF < 0.1
    - Remove synonymous variants
- Generates TSV variant list
- Generate BSVI-friendly VCF

## Limitations
- Designed to be used as part of Uranus workflow for processing myeloid NGS panel
- When building the app, mark-section and mark-success must be executable for the app to build correctly - these two scripts are executable in this repo but it can be easy to miss if the executable bit is lost as it's a metadata change

Commit message:

Additional panels & previous counts annotation

Readme.md, after:

# eggd vcf handler for uranus

## What does this app do?
### This app uses bedtools, bcftools and VEP to take VCFs from sentieon mutect2 and:
- Annotates and filters the sentieon mutect2 VCF
- Produces a excel workbook with sub-panels presented in separate sheets; also provides preformatted text to aid Epic data entry
- Produces a VCF that can be used as input for BSVI, as BSVI can't handle mutect2's (VCFv4.2 compliant) representation of multiallelic variants in VCF

## What are typical use cases for this app?
### This app uses the follow tools which are app assets:
* bcftools (v1.12)
* bedtools (v2.30.0)
* python_packages (numpy-1.20.1, pandas-1.2.3, pytz-2021.1, XlsxWriter-1.4.0)

### This app uses the following provided as inputs (these are all actually bundled into a single "VEP_tarball"):
* VEP (v103.1) (docker image)
* VEP refseq (v103) annotation sources
* CADD (v1.6) which now includes splicing
* ClinVar VCF (20210501 release) modified to add chr prefix
* 138 merge VCF containing counts of each variant detected in first 138 samples

### This app has access to the Internet

## What data are required for this app to run?
- VCF output from sentieon mutect2 as part of Uranus workflow
- BED file that details ROIs for myeloid NGS panel (default specified)
- Genome FASTA and index that was used by to generate the VCF (default specified)
- VEP tarball consisting of VEP docker, plugins and annotation sources (default specified)

## What does this app output?
- Excel workbook of annotated variants
- BSVI-friendly VCF
- Intermediate VCFs

## How does this app work?
- Filters VCF with bedtools:
    - retain variants within ROI
- Filters VCF with bcftools:
    - retain positions where at least one variant has AF > 0.03
    - retain positions where DP >99
    - split multiallelics using `--keep-sum AD` which changes the ref AD to be the sum of AD's
    - split multiallelics requires fixing AD and RPA number field in header from `.` to `R`
- Annotates VCF with VEP:
    - Annotate against specified refseq transcripts with
        - gene symbol
        - variant class
        - variant consequence
        - exon number
        - HGVS c. & p.
        - gnomAD AF
        - SIFT
        - PolyPhen
        - dbSNP
        - COSMIC
        - ClinVar
        - CADD
        - previous counts
- Filters VCF with VEP:
    - Retain variants with gnomAD AF < 0.1
    - Remove synonymous variants
- Generates variant lists (one panel per sheet) in an excel workbook
- Generates BSVI-friendly VCF

## Limitations
- Designed to be used as part of Uranus workflow for processing myeloid NGS panel
- When building the app, mark-section and mark-success must be executable for the app to build correctly - these two scripts are executable in this repo but it can be easy to miss if the executable bit is lost as it's a metadata change
